[Music]
okay this morning I'm speaking on the
question of corruption and corruption is
defined as the abuse of a position of
trust for the benefit of yourself or in
the case of our context your friends
your family or even an ciouds okay
friends family and transients what we
need to understand what we understand
about corruption we understand that we
have been Mis educated about it we have
to admit that we have the courage to
admit that the search engine how we deal
with it the first thing is that the big
myths number one is that in fact it's
not really a crime when we get together
with friends and family we discuss crime
in our country crime in Belmont to a
crime indigo or crime in Marabella
nobody's speaking about corruption as
the honest truth where the Commission of
police comes on TV to talk about crime
he isn't speaking about corruption and
we know for sure when he minister of
national security speaking about crime
he not talking about corruption either
the point I'm making is that it is a
crime it's an economic crime because we
involving in looting of taxpayers money
public and private corruption is a
reality as someone who come to any
private sector I could tell you there's
a massive amount of corruption in the
private sector that has nothing to read
government the same bribes and
backhanders and things that take place
on the table it all takes place in the
private sector today I'm focusing on
public sector corruption which is
private sector also participates in the
second important myth to understand
because we have to destroy these myths
dismantle them and destroy them and
ridicule him the second important myth
to understand is the one that says that
in fact corruption is only a small
problem if it is a problem it's only a
small problem that in fact it's only a
little ten or fifteen percent it's been
going on forever it probably will
continue forever
and there's no point passing any laws
because as little we could do about it
and I want to demonstrate that that -
it's a dangerous myth very dangerous
it's a piece of public mischief
and I want to speak a little bit take us
back about 30 years we're coming out
today from Trinidad and Tobago a
resource-rich small Caribbean country
and in the early 1970s we had a massive
increase in the country's wealth and
that increase was caused by the increase
in world oil prices we call them
petrodollars the Treasury was bursting
at money and it's ironic because we're
standing today any central bank
you see history's rich in irony we stand
in the daily central bank and its
central bank irresponsible a lot of the
things I'm going to be speaking about
okay we're talking about
irresponsibility in public office we're
speaking about the fact that across the
terrace the next star is the Ministry of
Finance and these there's a lot of
connection with us today so we speaking
at any temple today okay now the first
thing I want to talk about is that when
all of this money flowed into our
country about 40 years ago we embarked
the government of the day embarked on a
series of Covanta government
arrangements to have rapidly developed
the country and some of the largest
projects in the country were being
constructed through government the
government arrangements with some of the
leading countries in the world the
United States and Britain and France and
so on and so on
as I said even this building was
standing and that's one of the ironies
this building was part of that series of
complexes what we call it twin towers it
became so outrageous the whole situation
that in fact a commission of inquiry was
appointed and it reported in 1982 30
years ago it reported Ebola report 30
years ago and immediately the
government-to-government arrangements
were stopped the then Prime Minister
into Parliament to give a budget speech
and he said some things that I'll never
forget they went right in here I was a
young man at the time he went right into
my heart and he said that in fact let me
see this thing works we get bigger yeah
that's what he told us he told us that
in fact too old of every three dollars
of our petrol dollars that we spend it
tax payers money was wasted or stolen so
the ten or fifteen percent is pure
mischief
as we say is an ANSI story forget it
that's what little children we are big
people how me trying to deal with what's
happening in our society okay this is
the size of the problem okay
two thirds really money stolen away it's
did that was 30 years ago 1982 was Bala
so what has changed I don't like to
bring up embarrass in secret is an
international audience but I have to
four months ago we suffered a
constitutional outrage in this country
we call a dissection 34 fiasco the
section 34 Fiasco a suspicious piece of
law and I'm gonna say it like it is a
suspicious piece of law was passed at a
suspicious time to free some suspects
and it was called those people are
called the Piarco Airport accused I'm
gonna have my own lexicon speaking here
today they are the Piarco Airport
accused it was a constitutional outrage
of the first order and I have labeled it
the plot to pervert Parliament our
highest institution in our country was
perverted we are dealing with perverts
here of an economic and financial nature
that get out serious problem ends it was
massive protests a lot of us in this
room to partly protest in different
forms most importantly the American
Embassy complained so Parliament to
swiftly reconvened and in law was
reversed it was repealed as a were
lawyers use it was repealed but the
point is that Parliament was outwitted
in the whole course of events because
what really happened is that because of
the suspicious passage of that law the
law was actually passed into effect on
the weekend we celebrated our 50th
anniversary of Independence our jubilee
of Independence so that is that is the
kind of outrage everything it was a kind
of odd and nasty way to get my curation
or we got it because we all understood
it and for the first time that I could
remember there were mass protests
against this corruption and that was
that gave me a lot of hope okay those of
us who are sometimes you feel like you a
little bit on your own doing some of
this work that passage of the law and
you repeated a law 45 case of the Piarco
Airport accused so it was one of those
really superior double bluff kind of
things that took place
but what will he accused of what was it
they were Q's haven't been a bit
mysterious for those of you out there
what were they accused of we were trying
to build or reconstruct largely an
airport that had grown outdated the
entire project cost about 1.6 billion
dollars
trailer dollars to learn tobago dollars
and in fact we had a lot of bid rigging
and suspicious activity corrupt activity
took place and to get an idea of what it
consisted of and to put it in context in
relationship to this whole second myth
about it being no big thing we can look
at the second slide here and what we
have here this is not I am NOT saying so
this is the Director of Public
Prosecutions in a written statement he
said so and he is telling us that for
the 1.6 billion dollar custody project 1
billion dollars has been traced to
offshore bank accounts 1 billion dollars
of our taxpayers money has been located
in offshore bank accounts being the kind
of suspicious person I am I'm outraged
at that and I'm gonna pause here pause
now and again and bring in different
things I'm gonna pause here and bring in
something I saw in November last year at
Wall Street I was at Zuccotti Park it
was it was autumn it was cool it was
damp he was getting dark and I was
walking around with protesters looking
at the one Wall Street occupy wall
street movement walking around and there
was a lady with a sign a very simple
sign I kind of a battered looking blond
lady and he sang with me lot of bristol
board as we said his bats I was made at
a marker and it what said on that sign
hit me right any sent ID said if you're
not outraged you haven't been paying
attention if you're not outraged by all
of this you haven't been paying
attention so it's numb because we get it
into even deeper waters my brain started
thinking well what if because I'm
suspicious like that every lot of spy
novels and stuff what if
but but to make it but to make it in his
wrongs you have to read a lot of spy
novels and follow some of that stuff
right but but what if this wasn't the
first time what if this is just the
first time that is so-and-so had been
caught what if it had happened before
how would I find out now the previous
two examples I give way to do it
construction sector corruption okay and
I'm have a privilege at its time to lead
to join conservative Council which is
enough for profit we're at JCCC dot org
dot t-- t-- and we have the building
leaders in its struggle to probably
produce a new public procurement system
about how public money is transacted so
those of you interested in finding out
more about that are joining us or
signing up in any of our petitions
please get involved but I'm gonna segue
to another thing that relates because
one of my private campaigns have been
conducting for over three and a half
years it's for transparency and
accountability are only been out of CL
financial CL Financial is the Caribbeans
largest ever conglomerate okay and
without getting into all of the details
it is said to have collapsed I using my
words very carefully it set of collapsed
in January of oh nine which is just
coming up to nearly four years in an
unprecedented fit of generosity and you
have to be very suspicious about these
people in an unprecedented and amusing
that would care for the unprecedented
fit of generosity the government of the
day sign made a written commitment to
repay all of the creditors and I can
tell you it out fear of contradiction
that hasn't happened anywhere else on
the planet let's understand because we
don't be like in context people tell us
is just like Wall Street is not just
like Wall Street children are the Big O
is like a place with different laws of
physics or biology or something
it's not just like it's not just like
anywhere it's not just it's not just
like anywhere it's not just like
anywhere yeah he's here and all beers
out there okay
I'm serious oh no listen they've had
bailouts on Wall Street
they've had below in London they've had
bailouts in Europe in Africa they've had
bailouts in Nigeria six of the major
commercial banks collapsed at the same
time as ours it's interesting to
parallel wholly Nigerian experience as
how they've treated with it they treat
it very Bella compared to us nowhere any
planet have all the creditors been
bailout in excess of what their
statutory entitlement only here so what
was the reason for the generosity it's
our government not generous and maybe
they are let's look at it let's look
into it so I started digging and writing
and so on and so on and that work could
be found at my personal will could be
found at a forum on comm it is my name
it's a not-for-profit blog that I run
not as popular as some of the other
people but there you go but the point is
that the beta experience of section 34
that what the pervert Parliament that
bitter experience that took place in
August when we were supposed to be
celebrating our independence going into
September forced me to check myself and
recalculate my bearings and to go back
into somebody work somebody stuff I'd
written and somebody exchanges I'd had
video officials to see what was really
what as you say internal and tobago who
is who and what is what okay we want to
try to recalculate and I made a freedom
of information application in May this
year the Ministry of Finance the
Ministry of Finance is the next hour
over this is the other context the
Ministry of Finance we are told is
subject to the provisions of the Freedom
of Information Act I'm going to take you
through a worked example of whether
that's really so the central bank and if
you stand this morning is immune from
the provisions of descent of the Freedom
of Information Act so in fact you can't
ask them anything and they don't have to
answer anything that is that is in law
since 1999 so I plunge into this trouble
and I asked for questions
and I'll relate the question so you're
in the short form with the reply so you
could understand as I said where we are
here it's not like any males question
number one I asked the city accounts of
CL financial and if you can't show me
the accounts the Minister of Finance is
making statements passing new laws and
giving speeches and so on what are the
figures he is relying on like that joke
I want whatever he's drinking and they
wrote back and said to me well what do
you really mean so he hit my question
with a question
second point I want to see who are the
creditors of the group who've been
repaid any pause here to point out all
the twenty-four billion dollars of our
money has been spent on this that is
about three and a half billion u.s.
dollars coming out of a small we used to
be resource rich Caribbean country okay
and I asked the question who was getting
that three and a half billion dollars
and I want to pause again to bring up
context cuz context helps us to get
clarity understand in this thing there's
a particular individual who is in the
government now the name of the person
doesn't matter and that person made a
career out of using the Freedom of
Information Act that Vance's political
cause okay it's name is an important I
wouldn't dignify a time on a point the
point is that person made a career out
of using the Freedom of Information Act
that Vance's force and the most famous
case was what we came to call his secret
scholarship scandal where in fact there
was about sixty million dollars in
government money that had been disbursed
in a series of scholarships and his
scholarships hadn't been advertised and
so on and so on and so on and he was
able to get the court using that Act of
Parliament Freedom of Information Act to
release the information and I thought
that was excellent fantastic but the
city question is this if it's right and
proper for us to use the Freedom of
Information Act and to use the court to
force our disclosure about sixty million
dollars in public money it must be right
and proper for us the forces closely
about twenty four billion dollars
you see but even its fear finance
equipment and second Treaty Ministry of
Finance wrote me and said to me that
information is exam two you see this is
what we delimit okay the third thing I
will tell you is that I also asked for
the directors of CL Financial whether in
fact they were making filings under our
integrity in public life Act we have an
integrity in public life at this part of
our framework suppose it to safeguard e
nation's interest and public officials
are supposed to file to say what it is
they have in terms of assets and
liabilities and of course have since
discovered that they're not filing and
in fact Minister finance is not a man's
name to file so here we have it we have
a situation where the basic safeguards
of integrity and accountability and
transparency have all been discarded
I've asked the question in in legally
required fashion it's been ignored the
sort of thing that motivated as our own
section 34 we need to continue to work
on that we can't forget it I have
defined as this single largest
expenditure in the country's history
it's also the single largest example of
public corruption according to this
equation and this is my reality check
well you have an expenditure of public
money and it is without accountability
and it's without transparency it will
always be equal to corruption whether
you're in Russia or Nigeria or Alaska it
will always be equal to corruption and
that is what we are dealing with here
I'm going to continue the work to press
on to get some resolution of those
matters any Ministry of Finance if it is
I have to go to court personally I will
do that we will continue to press on
we continue to work within JCCC but I
want to step back from internal and
tobago contexts and bring something new
to the table in terms of an
international example we had the
journalist Rebecca Brock speaking about
her battle against government corruption
and she introduced me to this website
Alva Telecom Alva telecom is a way for
us to have an open database for freedom
in
emission applications and speak with
each other I could see what you are
applying for you could see what I
applied for what reply is I got we can
work on it together we to build a
collective database and a collective
understanding of where we are to go to
the next point me to increase the
consciousness the final thing I want to
say is in relation to this one which is
a lovely website from India called I
paid a bribe calm you have international
branches and it's important for us to
tune into this one I paid a bribe calm
is really important good one to log on
to and see I'm going to pause there I'm
gonna ask you for your courage discard
the first method is a crime discard a
second myth it is a big thing it's a
huge problem as an economic crime and
let us continue working together to
betterment in this situation stability
and sustainability in our society
[Music]